Update Deployment and Launch READMEs and Simplify the Workflow (#986)
UBCSailbot/sailbot_workspace: .devcontainer/release/README.md

# Deploying a release to the Raspberry Pi

This guide covers building a release image of `sailbot_workspace` and deploying
it to the onboard Raspberry Pi. There are three build paths:

- **Path A — CI build + tar transfer** (recommended; Pi offline)
- **Path B — CI build + registry pull** (Pi has internet; take a long time to build)
- **Path C — local build + tar transfer** (fallback; requires native arm64 preferably)

All three produce the same `linux/arm64` release image. Paths A and B build it
in GitHub Actions on a native arm64 runner (~6 min), which is faster and more
reliable than building locally.

> > **Build on arm64, not under emulation.** The release image is `linux/arm64`.

Reviewer: What is this?

Author: If the image architecture platform = arm64 and the local machine architecture = amd64, then you will need an architecture emulator to build the image on the local machine. This emulator is significantly slower compared to building the image on its native architecture.

> Building it on an `amd64` machine uses QEMU emulation, which is ~5× slower
> (~30 min) and segfaults on the `ldconfig` step of the ROS dependency install.
> CI runs on `ubuntu-24.04-arm` (native), so prefer Paths A/B. Only build
> locally (Path C) on real arm64 hardware: an Apple Silicon Mac, the Pi itself,
> or an arm64 cloud VM.

---

## Paths A & B — CI build (shared first step)

Both paths start with a single CI workflow run that builds the image natively on

> arm64, pushes it to the registry, and saves a tar artifact in parallel (~6 min).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
arm64, pushes it to the registry, and saves a tar artifact in parallel (for Path A). This takes about 6 minutes.
```

There are two ways in running the CI. One is manually and the other is through a
software release on GitHub. It is preferable to create a release so that we can
track what version of the software we used for deployment and the changes
compared to the previous release.

**For running CI through a release (preferred):**

1. On GitHub: **Releases** → **Draft a new release** → **Choose a tag** → type a
   new tag (e.g. `on-water-8`) → **Publish release**.

> 2. The **Registers Built Image and Produces Tar File** workflow triggers

Reviewer: This is very confusing? Is **Registers Built Image and Produces Tar File** a button? or what is it?

Reviewer: Is it the name of the workflow. If yes, i would prefer it like this 
```suggestion
2. The workflow **Registers Built Image and Produces Tar File** triggers
```

   automatically. Both jobs run in parallel:

>    - **build-and-push** — pushes to `ghcr.io/ubcsailbot/sailbot_workspace/release:<tag>`

Reviewer: what does "and `:latest`" mean?

Author: In the 'build-release-image-and-tar.yml':
>           tags: |
>             ghcr.io/ubcsailbot/sailbot_workspace/release:${{ inputs.tag || github.event.release.tag_name }}
>             ghcr.io/ubcsailbot/sailbot_workspace/release:latest

The latest tag can be used by us to quickly pull the latest changes on the main branch quickly rather than remembering a bispoke tag name.

      and `:latest`
   - **build-tar** — uploads `release.tar` as a downloadable artifact (`release-<tag>-tar`)

> 3. Once both jobs pass, continue with **Path A** or **Path B** below.

Reviewer: Should give the link here to where either is

**For manual CI build:**

1. Push your changes to your branch.

2. On GitHub: **Actions** tab → **Registers Built Image and Produces Tar File**
   workflow →
   **Run workflow** → change the branch from `main` to your branch, enter a tag
   (e.g. `on-water-8`) → **Run workflow**.

   The workflow runs two jobs in parallel:
   - **build-and-push** — pushes to
      `ghcr.io/ubcsailbot/sailbot_workspace/release:<tag>` and `:latest`
   - **build-tar** — uploads `release.tar` as a downloadable artifact (`release-<tag>-tar`)

3. Once both jobs pass, continue with **Path A** or **Path B** below.

---

## Path A — tar transfer (Pi offline)

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD013 -->

1. **Download the artifact.** On the finished run's page, download the
   `release-<tag>-tar` artifact (it arrives zipped; unzip to get `release.tar`).
   Or from the CLI:

   ```bash
   gh run download <run-id> -n release-<tag>-tar
   ```

> 2. **Transfer to the Pi** (see [Reaching the Pi](https://ubcsailbot.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/prjt22/pages/1791230669/Raspberry+Pi+Main+Computer+Setup) for which address to use):

Reviewer: why not just mention the address here?

Author: Just in case the address changes in the future.
